.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH TACHYON 1 "May 2026" "tachyon 1.2.0" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
tachyon \- post-quantum encrypted XDP tunnel

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tachyon
.I COMMAND
[\fIARGUMENTS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tachyon
is a high-performance encrypted tunnel using eBPF/XDP for the data plane and
a kernel crypto module for in-kernel AEAD encryption. The control plane runs
in userspace and performs an authenticated key exchange (AKE v5 "Ghost-PQ"),
periodic key ratchet, and traffic-analysis countermeasures.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B up \fICONFIG\fR
Bring up a tunnel using the INI-format configuration at \fICONFIG\fR. Loads
the XDP program, attaches it to the configured physical interface, populates
BPF maps, and starts the control-plane handshake.

.TP
.B down \fICONFIG\fR
Detach the XDP program, remove BPF maps, and tear down the veth pair created
for the tunnel named in \fICONFIG\fR.

.TP
.B show \fICONFIG\fR
Print human-readable statistics (TX/RX bytes, packets, replay drops, crypto
errors, handshake counts) for the named tunnel.

.TP
.B genkey
Generate a new X25519 private key and print 64 hex characters to stdout.

.TP
.B pubkey
Read a private key (64 hex characters) from stdin and print the corresponding
public key to stdout.

.TP
.B backup \fICONFIG\fR
Snapshot session state (encrypted with BackupKey from config) to stdout for
warm-restart use cases.

.TP
.B restore \fICONFIG\fR
Restore previously-snapshotted state from stdin.

.TP
.B version
Print the build version.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TACHYON_PRIVATE_KEY
Override the PrivateKey config field at runtime. Cleared from the process
environment after the value is captured.

.TP
.B TACHYON_PEER_PUBLIC_KEY
Override the PeerPublicKey config field.

.TP
.B TACHYON_PSK
Override the PSK (preshared key) config field.

.TP
.B TACHYON_LOG_FORMAT
\fBjson\fR or \fBtext\fR (default: text). Selects structured or
human-readable log output.

.TP
.B TACHYON_LOG_LEVEL
\fBdebug\fR, \fBinfo\fR (default), \fBwarn\fR, or \fBerror\fR. Controls
verbosity.

.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM, SIGINT
Initiate graceful shutdown with drain phase (default 5 seconds, configurable
via \fIShutdownDrainSeconds\fR). All keys are cleansed from memory before exit.

.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration. Hot-reloadable fields:
.IR obfs_flags ,
.IR cover_rate_hz ,
.IR port_hop_seconds ,
.IR padding ,
.IR LogLevel .
Non-reloadable fields are logged as warnings and ignored.

.TP
.B SIGUSR1
Trigger zero-downtime hot-restart: fork+exec a new instance with the listen
socket inherited via FD passing, then drain the old instance.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/tachyon/*.conf
Default location for tunnel config files.

.TP
.I /sys/fs/bpf/tachyon/*
Pinned BPF maps (one directory per tunnel name).

.TP
.I /var/log/tachyon-audit.log
Audit log destination when \fIAuditLog\fR is set in config.

.SH HEALTH ENDPOINTS
When \fIMetricsEnabled = true\fR, an HTTP server is bound on
\fIMetricsPort\fR (default 9090) on loopback only:
.IP \(bu
\fBGET /health\fR \(em liveness probe (always 200 if process alive)
.IP \(bu
\fBGET /ready\fR \(em readiness probe (200 once a session key is established)
.IP \(bu
\fBGET /metrics\fR \(em Prometheus exposition format
.IP \(bu
\fBGET /version\fR \(em build version JSON

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ip-link (8),
.BR bpftool (8),
.BR systemd-analyze (1).

The full operations runbook lives at
.I /usr/share/doc/tachyon/OPERATIONS.md.

.SH AUTHORS
The Tachyon Maintainers.

.SH LICENSE
MIT for userspace components, GPL-2.0 for kernel module and XDP/eBPF code.
See \fI/usr/share/doc/tachyon/LICENSE\fR.
